Update CFG documentation (#386)
SonarSource/sonar-php: doc/CFG.md

# SonarPHP Control Flow Graph

## Definition

A CFG is a graph of [basic blocks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_block) (from now on, we will use the term 'block'), where block is sequence of statements executed linearly without branching.

### Blocks

#### Block attributes

> * *successors* - set of blocks that are executed after specific block. Each block has one or more successors. Only exception is special `END` block, representing end of the control flow, which has zero successors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *successors* - set of blocks that are executed after specific block. Each block has one or more successors. The only exception is the special `END` block, representing the end of the control flow, which has zero successors.
```

> * *predecessors* - set of blocks that are executed before specific block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *predecessors* - set of blocks that are executed before specific a block
```

* *syntactic successor*
  - an imaginary successor which exists only for blocks ending with unconditional jumps (`break`, `continue`, `return`, `goto`, `throw`)
  - it is the "normal" successor in case the jump would be omitted
  - for non-jump blocks, it is `null`
* *elements*
  - list of statements (represented as AST node) inside the block which are executed sequentially
  - `return` or jump like `break`, `continue` will be the last statement in the elements list  (if such statement is present in the block)

##### Branching block

> `if`, `while`, `for`,  `foreach`  and `do-while` statements generate a special type of the block called Branching Block. It has all the attributes of a normal block, however it has exactly two successors representing *true* and *false* branch of execution and it has additional attribute *branching tree* which contains the statement causing the branching (e.g. AST node of `if` condition).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`if`, `while`, `for`,  `foreach`  and `do-while` statements generate a special type of the block called Branching Block. It has all the attributes of a normal block, however it has exactly two successors representing *true* and *false* branch of execution and it has an additional attribute *branching tree* which contains the statement causing the branching (e.g. AST node of `if` condition).
```

# Sonar-PHP Control Flow Graph

## Definition

A CFG is a graph of [basic blocks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_block) (from now on, we will use the term 'block'), where block is sequence of statements executed linearly without branching.

### Blocks

#### Block attributes

* successors - set of blocks that are executed after specific block
* predecessors - set of blocks that are executed before specific block
* syntactic successor
  - an imaginary successor which exists only for blocks ending with unconditional jumps (`break`, `continue`, `return`, `goto`, `throw`)
  - it is the "normal" successor in case the jump would be omitted
  - for non-jump blocks, it is `null`
* elements
  - list of statements (represented as AST node) inside the block which are executed sequentially

>   - `return` or jump like `break`, `continue` will be the last statement in the elements list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `return` or jump like `break`, `continue` will be the last statement in the elements list (if such statements are present in the block)
```

Reviewer 2: It should be singular `statement`

> #### Block types

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why a block type is not an attribute of the block.

Author: I reformulated this part. It was too much oriented towards implementation, by type we meant class inheriting from generic block. Attributes of these other blocks are the same, only branching block has some additional attributes (having exactly 2 successors with true and false labels and keeping the reference to the tree causing the branching)

> Different implementations of blocks:

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the meaning of the word `implementations` here. Please clarify.

Author: This was removed, see above

> * Simple block - one or multiple successors

Reviewer 2: A simple block should only have one successor no?

Author: No, we use the same block regardless of number of successors

* Branching block
  - has 2 successors - one TRUE successor and one FALSE successor

>   - contains the branching tree - e.g. IfStatementTree or loop trees

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this item. Using `IfStatementTree` and loop trees seems inconsistent to me.

Author: Loops and If are generating branching block because they split the control flow to the true and false branches

* End block - no successors

### Statements

> Statements that are considered for building blocks:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Statements that generate blocks:
```

* `try`,  `throw`,  `return`, `break`,  `continue`,  `goto`,  `label`, `do-while`, `while`, `for`,  `foreach`, `if`, `switch`

Every other statement will be added as element to the containing block (including ternary expressions).

In other words, we do not explore the expressions inside the above statements when building the CFG, we just add them to the list of elements.

## Implementation

> The CFG  is built using bottom-up approach. This means that we start with empty END block (bottom), which represents end of the control flow in the current function and we process backwards all the statements in the block recursively. Algorithm is implemented as an AST visitor in [ControlFlowGraphBuilder](php-frontend/src/main/java/org/sonar/php/cfg/ControlFlowGraphBuilder.java)

Reviewer: update link to ControlFlowGraphBuilder

> The CFG  is built using bottom-up approach. This means that we start with empty END block (bottom), which represents end of the control flow in the current function and we process backwards all the statements in the block recursively. Algorithm is implemented as an AST visitor in [ControlFlowGraphBuilder](php-frontend/src/main/java/org/sonar/php/cfg/ControlFlowGraphBuilder.java)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CFG  is built bottom-up: we start with empty END block (bottom), which represents end of the control flow in the current function and recursively process the predecessor statements in the block. The algorithm is implemented as an AST visitor in [ControlFlowGraphBuilder](php-frontend/src/main/java/org/sonar/php/cfg/ControlFlowGraphBuilder.java)
```

> CFG is built for following kinds of trees: SCRIPT, FUNCTION_DECLARATION, FUNCTION_EXPRESSION, METHOD_DECLARATION.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A CFG is generated for the following trees: SCRIPT, FUNCTION_DECLARATION, FUNCTION_EXPRESSION, METHOD_DECLARATION.
```

### For Loop
The `for` statement creates multiple blocks:

- one for initialization of variables (before body)

> - one for the body of the for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- one for the body of the `for` statement
```

- one for update (following the body)
- one for the condition

### Switch

> The SWITCH statement is modelled as multiple `if-elseif-else` blocks. Interesting feature of `switch` statement in PHP is the fact that `continue` inside switch behaves the same as `break` statement ([see manual](http://php.net/manual/en/control-structures.continue.php))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SWITCH statement is modelled as multiple `if-elseif-else` blocks. An interesting feature of the `switch` statement in PHP is that a `continue` inside switch behaves as a `break` statement ([see manual](http://php.net/manual/en/control-structures.continue.php))
```

### Try Catch Finally

We made several assumptions to simplify construction of CFG for `try-catch-finally` construct

> * To limit number of blocks and edges in the graph whole `try` body is treated as single block with `catch` and `finally` treated as successors of this block, while in fact every statement in the body could raise the exception and exit the block. It is up to the analysis using the CFG to take into consideration that body may not be executed as a whole.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To limit the number of blocks and edges in the graph the whole `try` body is treated as single block with `catch` and `finally` treated as successors of this block, while in fact every statement in the body could raise an exception and exit the block. It is up to the analysis using the CFG to take into consideration that the body may not be executed as a whole.
```

> * If the `finally` clause is missing we assume as if empty `finally` clause was present to simplify the construction of CFG. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the `finally` clause is missing we assume that an empty `finally` clause is present to simplify the construction of CFG. 
```

> * We always assume that it is possible that exception is not being handled by any present `catch` clause, even if there is `catch` clause handling all `Exception` types. In particular this means that there is always path in the CFG representing exception escaping the function scope and reaching `END` block (visiting all enclosed `finally` blocks on the way)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We always assume that it is possible that an exception is not handled by any present `catch` clause, even if there is `catch` clause handling all `Exception` types. In particular this means that there is always a path to the `END` block (visiting all enclosed `finally` blocks on the way)
```

### Limitations

#### Empty blocks

> During construction of CFG it might happen that some empty blocks are created (e.g. empty `finally` clause, ...). We have a mechanism to cleanup these empty blocks, however it is limited that it can only remove empty blocks with single predecessor and successor. If empty block has multiple successors (which happens often with `try-catch-finally` statements) it is not removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the construction of the CFG it might happen that some empty blocks are created (e.g. empty `finally` clause, ...). We have a mechanism to cleanup these empty blocks, however it is limited that it can only remove empty blocks with one predecessor and one successor. If an empty block has multiple successors (which happens often with `try-catch-finally` statements) it is not removed.
```

> #### Impossible paths from `finally`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Unfeasible paths from `finally`
```

> Because we are building using bottom-up approach, we will construct `finally` block before we construct the block for the `try` body. This `finally` block will have two successors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we are building using bottom-up approach, we will construct the `finally` block before we construct the block for the `try` body. This `finally` block will have two successors:
```

1. "exceptional" successor representing the path for the unhandled exception connecting it to the outer `finally` clause or  `END` block.
2.  "normal" successor to the statement following the `try` statement.

> This "normal" successor can be infeasible in case when there is abrupt termination of the control flow like using `return` or `break` in the try body. Consider the following example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This "normal" successor can be infeasible in case when there is an abrupt termination of the control flow like using `return` or `break` in the try body. Consider the following example
```

```php
while ($cond) {
    try {
        foo();
        break;
    } finally {
        cleanup();
    }
    afterTry();
}
```

Our CFG will look like this

![](infeasible-finally-path.png)

> Notice that red edge is actually impossible, but it will be present in the CFG due to this limitation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the red edge is actually impossible, but it will be present in the CFG due to this limitation.
```

## Tests

> The best documentation is Test Automation, see [ControlFlowGraphTest](php-frontend/src/test/java/org/sonar/php/cfg/ControlFlowGraphTest.java).

Reviewer: update link to ControlFlowGraphTest
